The Simplicity of 'Think-Pair-Share'
====================================

George Williams

In many courses, [class
discussion](http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/tag/class-discussion)
is a central part of student learning. Whether you’re using the Socratic
method or aiming for something much more freeform, getting your students
to voice their (sometimes not fully-formed) thoughts can be an
especially effective way of engaging active learning.

What do you do if your students are reluctant to talk? Erin wrote [a
great post early last
year](http://chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/silence-is-golden/22936)
with specific suggestions for addressing this situation. What if only a
few students actually participate in class discussion regularly? This is
undesirable for two reasons. First, their thoughts take on a
disproportionate weight in the conversations, and second, the other
students are allowed to coast, letting these few students do the
majority of the work necessary in class discussion.

One activity that I’ve found quite useful was developed by Frank Lyman
thirty years ago and goes by the name
“[think-pair-share](http://www.google.com/search?q=frank+lyman+think+pair+share).”
(I’m pretty sure [this
publication](http://books.google.com/books?id=2XMyGwAACAAJ) is where
Lyman first wrote about this activity.) It’s really quite simple, but
it’s almost always effective, in my experience. Here’s how it works:

1.  Ask a clearly-phrased question of your students. Be sure everyone
    understands what you’re asking. See if anyone needs you to repeat
    the question. Give students a couple of minutes to think about their
    answer to the question.
2.  Have each student turn to a person seated nearby and discuss their
    answers to the question for a few minutes.
3.  Finally, ask for volunteers to share details from their discussions.

This activity allows every student the opportunity to think something
through and discuss their thoughts out loud. It also shields students
who might be shy from having to speak up in front of a room full of
people, which creates a significant amount of anxiety in many people.
And “think-pair-share” can also help with the problem of a few student
voices always being the same ones heard in each class meeting.

After I used this technique several times earlier this semester, I
wondered if it was as widely known as I had assumed. After learning via
Twitter that only about half of those who responded to a query already
knew of this discussion strategy, I figured it would be worthwhile to
share a few details more widely.
